---
title:  "Why doesn't a stat major get you into a stat PhD?"
subtitle:  "What should a stat major be anyways?"
author:  "Evan Knox"
time:  "Oct 17, 2020"
---

(Note:  I am, as you will note below, a largely dreadful writer who channels ponderousness and verbal akrasia.  I'm given to understand that writing and trying to get more brief as one goes one is probably one of the better ways to fix this, so I've resolved to write periodically, largely about the topic I care for more than most other things:  undergraduate curriculum design, particularly in statistics.  Hopefully some day all of my subsequent thoughts will coalesce into a fully-formed teaching statement like so many of Sam Wainwright or Mr. McGuire's enticing polymers.)

Earlier this week, a group of statistics PhD students from Cal (UC-Berkeley if one prefers) and Michigan ran a Zoom panel discussion to answer questions prospective students might have about how they might fit in a statistics PhD program and how to best go about applying to statistics PhD programs.  I'm glad this group went ahead and took the initiative to help further democratize grad school admissions (a process that's so insider-biased that I managed to have a parent who's a tenured professor and still not be sufficiently in-the-know); I'm further glad to see that Washington has already scheduled a similar sort of Q&A session for next month.  Even so, during the discussion this past week, one of the discussants (Drew Nguyen, from Cal) reminded me of a persistent annoyance of mine from the statistics PhD application process:  statistics majors don't get you into statistics PhD programs.  

Now, I should be careful to note:  there are many statistics majors in statistics PhD programs!  However, as Drew noted, Cal tends to focus more on the strict mathematics background of its applicants than their statistics background.  While I'm lacking in hard numbers to demonstrate this fact field-wide, it's not exactly a hidden secret -- one school I visited as an admitted PhD student noted that all but 1 person in the program (of ~30-45 total students, if memory serves) had majored in math, with statistics being common as an additional degree but not nearly as ubiquitous.  This isn't to say that you need be a math major everywhere;  I am not a math major (albeit I'm a class short of one), and one of the presenters at the recent Zoom panel (the moderator, Dan Kessler) was a psychology researcher with no linear algebra or real analysis background prior to statistics graduate school.  Otherwise, much has been made of Kristin Linn, a professor at Penn biostat and previously a PhD student at NC State who majored in music beforehand.  

In spite of the exceptions, though, I've spent the past year and change ramming my head into what I'm informed is "elementary" measure theory, so I'm quite aware exactly how a strong math background can be helpful in a statistics PhD program.  Fair enough; I take no offense to math majors being a pipeline to statistics PhD's (or economics PhD's, for that matter, although that's a discussion for another time).  Similarly, I take no offense to folks without degrees in either math or statistics or economics coming to statistics PhD programs;  anecdotally, statistics seems to be a field people often come to later in their academic careers, so it would seem both cruel and self-hamstringing to bar bright students from psychology or religious studies or ag tech or what have you.  

Rather, my principal concern is the statistics major in the United States higher education system, and what I perceive as a surprising lack of value that it imparts to its pupils.  To this point, there are assuredly at least two major complaints:  first, that statistics majors help get jobs doing statistics in industry.  Perhaps so; as a quintessential graduate student, I've never really applied for a job in my life, and was largely of the impression that I had absolutely zero job prospects outside of the academy with only a bachelor's degree in statistics (thinking I'd need a master's to be employable), so I'm hardly the best person to judge.  Some people from my cohort in statistics certainly got jobs, seemingly with only bachelor's degrees, so such a situation isn't so exceedingly rare.  Even my strongest argument against this is clearly piecemeal:  master's degrees in statistics are undoubtedly more employable than statistics majors, and also the employability of statistics majors may soon be losing out to the Kudzu of new data science majors popping up and to computer science majors that can provide additional value with some skill in (e.g.) software development or database management.  Ultimately, I hope that statistics majors are a good financial proposition in their own right (instead as a stepping stone to master's degrees in statistics/related fields); that would allay a good amount of my concern with the degree.  I will admit, for the record, that it seems my graduate institution unsurprisingly has an excellent hiring record for its statistics majors;  my concerns about the degree don't really extend to Ivy+ institutions, and frankly it's for the best that we don't take such institutions to be the default in conversations about higher education.

The second complaint corresponding to a possible lack of value that statistics majors bring is that college degrees don't exist as sheer conduits of better job prospects; they undoubtedly teach valuable skills that could get you hired and classical modeling techniques besides, but also understanding the strengths and limitations of polling and when you can and can't make causal interpretations from data and "how to think critically".    And, like, sure -- statistics majors do indeed do all those things.  I guess my concern in this case would be how this matches up to the opportunity cost.  I probably learned more about how to write an argument in my one semester taking a class on Nabokov than I did taking statistics classes -- we may call that "critical thinking" if you like.  Despite a vestigial familial disdain for engineers, I seriously doubt they don't "learn to think critically", and are assuredly more employable and (depending on the engineering field) are often more facile with their hands and in everyday situations.  

Fundamentally, none of these reasonable critique can satisfy my own gnawing sense of underwhelmedness at undergraduate statistics curricula.  Granted, this isn't a criticism I have only of statistics:  I triple-majored in undergrad, and given the choice of a re-do I'd likely change all my fields of study; statistics is probably the only one I'd seriously consider keeping.  My annoyance at my experience in undergraduate psychology can probably begin and end with numerous classes working in research not actually counting for anything, as well as my continued sense that I never knew enough about statistics to do anything useful (which eventually led me to statistics).  As for physics, I'd probably just swap it out for math or computer science and cut out the middleman -- hell, I originally started taking physics specifically because it seemed hard and an interesting challenge, so the underlying principle is the same anyways.  Even so, if you want to get a PhD in psychology, a psychology major is fine, albeit with care to take certain classes that may be extraneous.  If you want to get a PhD in physics, the same is generally true, although the amount of extraneous classes certainly seemed lessened.  As for psychology, I understand why not everyone is required to have a pre-PhD level of training -- psychology is often one of the most common majors on university campuses, and is sometimes a "default" for folks.  Even if that's not convincing, psychology majors can feed into mathematical psychology fields that often overlap with work statistics PhD students do, or neuropsychological study with elements of biochemistry and genetics, or clinical work, or numerous fields that don't require PhD's that nonetheless see psychology majors as reasonable stepping stones (HR, sales, numerous people-facing jobs); this seems like a rather broader territory than statistics majors must cover, in spite of our claim to "play in everyone's backyard".  Even given this, maybe I still give statistics less quarter than some other fields; my disenchantment remains unmoved.

As my subtitle some 30 miles above alludes to, if I'm so disillusioned with the current state of statistics majors, why not suggest a change?  What should a statistics major be?  Over the summer, as part of preparing for eCOTS and the Preparing to Teach workshop, I took a very brief stab at this.  Lacking anything resembling a formal approach, I decided I wanted a statistics major to accomplish 3 goals at the same time.  First, I wanted statistics majors to be immediately and easily employable, with nary a stop-over paying for a master's degree along the way needed unless truly desired.  Second, I wanted statistics majors' curricula to be a SUFFICIENT set of coursework for getting into a PhD program in statistics or biostatistics; none of this farce of tacking on extra math classes where needed.  Incidentally, a part of my desire to make the curriculum a self-contained sufficient curriculum for PhD admission is because I worry that folks who change fields late and don't have the insider knowledge of 2nd-generation academics like myself might find this expectation of additional math a harsh awakening, especially when money or credit hours are already tight.  In psychology or physics, most of the additional classes you were told to take for graduate school or PhD admission were nonetheless listed as psychology or physics classes; no such luck in statistics, wherein the combination of all fields' backyards seemingly leaves us with more of a wilderness to navigate.  However, my last goal is likely the most important by several orders of magnitude.  I've heard plenty about statistics trying to place more value on communication and writing skill.  In fact, in my undergraduate, we had exercises in our senior capstone course devoted specifically to writing and communication; hell, I played up whatever ephemeral communication skills I have whilst trying to get into PhD programs precisely beause I thought it wouldn't hurt to be a bit trendy.  This is all well and good -- communication and persuasiveness and writing and argument-formation and counterargument are all part of the nebulous "critical thinking" I've been referencing thus far, and they're also the backbones of a legitimate liberal arts education.  Fair enough; you wanna talk like a liberal arts degree?  Be a liberal arts degree, then.  I had been working on this ~ May 20-21, apparently even a little before the big ball of changing the name of the Fisher lecture got fully rolling, but in any case the general atmosphere of wanting to see statistics actual reckon with the eugenics of its past and the nigh-inevitable technophrenology of its present and future.  In any case, here's what I came up with:  https://docs.google.com/document/d/1FGjd3XdkxRwBhMNJZeeYvw1wM5cUpIargPlfJ2muRpA/edit?usp=sharing 

While I'm not unhappy with this curriculum I've drawn up, the sheer number of classes worries me for the same reasons that I'm glad many statisticians don't come directly down the math-stat pipeline -- people come to the field late, and bring their disparate non-math, non-stat experiences with them, and we're better for it.  Requiring massive gobs of coursework, then, is largely terrible for evangelizing the field.  At best, such experiences may fall under my manditory field of subject area study, or maybe even some of the math if they're lucky;  even so, having a list of required classes approaching engineering-levels of needing to be planned out years in advance is liable to scare away promising contributors.  My immediate thought in terms of how to solve this, unsurprisingly, is also a curricular question I wish to tackle going forward:  what should a statistics minor be?  

Even so, I cannot in good conscience write anymore at present, so I'll leave it on that note.  Some of my hoped-for topics to discuss (and, if you'll forgive my presumptuousness, maybe actually do some research on beforehand so I'm not just an anecdote Gatling gun) would obviously include the role of statistics minors in the field, as well as some dives into statistics pedagogy research via Dr. Cetinkaya-Rundel's work, feelings on how I might actually work to the benefit of diversity in statistics, developmental genetics as an exercise in model-building, my desire to incorporate ungrading into my statistics classes, or perhaps some thoughts on one of my father's previous editorials re: excused and unexcused absences in classes, death, and how school should fit into life.  