---
title:  "Imposter Advice"
author: "Evan Knox"
---

Invariably, lots of discussion intended for academic audiences focuses on the Imposter syndrome.  For whatever reasons, high-achieving academics often feel they're eternally underachieving and lacking in critical skills others in their field have.  Unsurprisingly, this tends to afflict in particular folks who are women, nonbinary, black, and just generally don't look and act like August Rush grown up and singularly focused on microarrays or whatever.  

As such, I think it's important that those of us who don't fall into any such categories, and have academic parents and relatives and whatnot, acknowledge when we are, in fact, lacking in many important skills for our fields.  A key component of (the colloquial version of) "Imposter Syndrome" is that the folks that experience it ARE actually qualified and reasonably good at their job/field.  Since I do not qualify for that, I will instead use this status as an avenue to review how I got to a statistics PhD, how I think I would've benefitted from some alternative pathways, and do my obligatory "here's my advice about studying statistics/getting into PhD programs" post that is so ubiquitous that it's effectively useless.  

# Pre-College Preparation

Ultimately, I think good preparation for grad school in statistics at this level is pretty simple:  take a lot of math, and care about some sort of topic.  

I was better at the former.  For comparison, I vaguely learned the power rule in 6th grade, skipped 7th grade math, and then took 11th grade math and AP Calc AB concurrently in twelth grade.  My dad and set a goal that I'd take up through differential equations (via integral and multivariate calc) by the time I graduated high school, which I met (albeit the sophomore-level pre-engineering version, not the fancy ODE proofs class or anything).  This was helpful because, even though I spent several years as a Physics/Psychology student and didn't really take that many math classes beyond what was offered in-house in those departments (linear algebra was a notable one, which I took to get more prepared for the Physics department's in-department matrix/complex analysis/assorted maths class), I could still catch up to the statistics grad school requirements and suggestions pretty easily (in my case, via Intro to Proofs + Sequences and Series, followed by Real Analysis).  Obviously if you already know you want to study statistics in high school, you can do everything I did in high school, and even benefit a little from swapping out my 2 dual-enrollment physics classes for statistics or linear algebra or computer science.

The caring about something, as I noted, was a bit harder for me.  I recommend this because I ultimately appreciate statistics much more as an applied field than as more abstracted numbers, e.g. the fields of mathematical statistics or statistical mathematics or whatever you like to call it.  These days, my supposed application areas of interest span a ton of topics:  neuroscience, climate change, genetics, record linkage (not strictly an application area, but let me have this), potentially education policy evaluation/econ of education, and pretty much anything else of note.  I have some amount of interest in all of these, and similarly some amount of background in each, but both for purposes of having long-term goals for your statistics career and for actually doing something useful while you're piling up on math classes (and getting actual on-the-ground knowledge of your application area, while you're at it), it seems like a good idea to have something you want to apply statistics to that you can work on applications to as you go along your journey.  For me, probably the closest thing is sports; that's a common area of interest for many statisticians, albeit not one that seems especially easy to follow into a career.  My examples of things along these lines:  working with animal shelters/zoos, whatever your preferred volunteering activities may be, doing research in a non-statistics field in the ISEF or at a local university or whatnot.  There are plenty of things that aren't nearly as formal, just generally care about something, work on that on the ground, learn about how it works and build enough skills in it to effectively work with those sorts of folks when do statistical analysis to improve such operations (and even if the statistical side of it doesn't pan out, hopefully you have a lifelong interest and some cool skills to go along with it).

Obviously, both of these suggestions, particularly the math-background, are rather easier to follow to level of my suggestions if you live in at least a moderately-sized city and have access to upper-middle-class or beyond sorts of resources.  I'm hardly qualified to give much advice to those not in those situations, but I'll give a few guesses.  For one, dual-enrollment seems relatively common in rural parts of my home-state (Georgia), so I suspect that may also be something to look into for folks not in cities; granted, that's a function of the community college/technical college/agricultural college infrastructure in your area (if you live in the US; I have even less to say about non-US situations).  Beyond that, if reliable internet is available to you, there are plenty such things that can be available online -- math classes (things like Khan Academy of course, but plenty of material to self-study online for more advanced topics), things to volunteer for and work on, researchers to cold-email and potentially collaborate with (provided it's not a bench lab sort of research).

# College

(Notes for future:  Breadth is probably good.  I wouldn't stick with any of my majors, including Stat -- replace with Comp. Sci.  Some fields are more valuable as symbols of intelligence in other fields than others.  Would generally encourage unusual paths, which are generally good for the soul but also will make you stick out in grad school applications)

In undergrad, I majored in three fields:  Physics, Psychology (emphasis in Neuroscience), and Statistics.  Given a re-do, I doubt I would choose any of those three as majors -- statistics is probably the only one I'd seriously consider.  

My revised plan would still be to triple major, but with the following guidelines:  one major in a STEM field that will be immediately useful in getting a job (e.g. some kind of engineering, computer science), one major in a liberal art sheerly for my own enjoyment without regard for how employable it would make me (e.g. theater, sociology, english), and one major in whatever I think would best prepare me for statistics (which may be statistics, but arguably could also be math, computer science, maybe a new data science degree).  I would also argue that it may be best to substitute in for this last major a major in an application area you hope to work on -- for instance, that particular interest you've had for some time now and have already worked on (e.g. ecology, genetics, meteorology, political science, education), particularly since many people have gone from degrees like computer science or engineering and gone on to excellent careers in statistics/data science (thereby somewhat limiting the benefits of another degree in a potentially similar field).  

Of course, most folks probably don't have the chance to triple-major in college, either for money-saving reasons or just because being able to dual-enroll for two years and take AP classes on top of that isn't super available outside of cities with a university and reasonably large and well-funded schools.  Fundamentally, plenty of what I've suggested (particularly the majors in a liberal art and an application area) could easily be made into minors or certificates or whatnot.  Frankly, it doesn't even really matter -- getting three majors is a great exercise in taking exactly the classes you need for the major, and often letting useful classes that aren't strict requirements for those majors fall by the wayside.  

(Discussion of topis most and least important to learn in undergrad?)

(Ones I wish I had learned:  most computer science, reading statistics papers, advanced linear models)


# Post-Undergrad

(Go straight to grad school or not?  )