---
title:  "Looking over STA 771S, Duke's class on teaching statistics"
author:  "Evan Knox"
time:  "Oct 24, 2020"
font: Times New Roman
---

While I was looking at Duke's recently-released list of courses for Spring 2021, I ran across STA 771S, one of two PhD-level courses my department lists that are focused on teaching statistics.  The other is one of many versions of STA 790 (our catch-all number for "special topics"), so it's unsurprising that it hasn't been taught recently (I see some info on it from 2012, by a professor who left some time ago).  However, it seems that STA 771S, in addition to being easier to search for, has also been taught much more recently -- in fact, in Fall 2018, with some focus on preparing teaching statements for prospective faculty searches at PUI's and for teaching-track positions more generally.  The professor, Dr. Cetinkaya-Rundel, is still affiliated with our department; however, I don't have much hope of her teaching this class in the near future (at least here, rather than in  Edinburgh); as such, I intend to work through the class' topics myself, and provide some of my own opinions thereof.  I don't and likely never will have the standing to critique Dr. Cetinkaya-Rundel's thoughts on teaching statistics, so my opinions are more intended to answer open-ended questions about the class than to question her judgments.

Week 1:  Introduction, GAISE guidelines

Discussion Q's:
What do you know about a "traditional" intro statistics curriculum? What topics / contents from this curriculum should we hold on to? What can go, and why?
What are biggest challenges to moving to a more computational intro statistics curriculum?
What do you want to get out of this course? Add notes to course Etherpad.

I addressed some feelings I have about the statistics curriculum writ large in my proposed statistics major curriculum, which I'll link again here:  https://docs.google.com/document/d/1FGjd3XdkxRwBhMNJZeeYvw1wM5cUpIargPlfJ2muRpA/edit?usp=sharing 

In any case, my feelings about intro statistics curricula are a little more muddled, both because I'm probably way too far removed from it to have good opinions (I took intro stat in Spring 2014; granted, I've taken other quasi-intro stat classes later on, and some topics that are beyond intro stat at my undergraduate department are taught in intro stat here at Duke) and because I would want statistics to be an integral part of middle and high school curricula (and hence would probably prefer most of the topics in intro stat to be covered before college).  I'm also a bit skewed in that, so far as I can tell, our Duke intro (even 101, not 199 or anything fancy) does in fact cover the entirety of the GAISE guidelines, at least presuming we actually get much time to cover multiple linear regresion, so nothing feels exactly groundbreaking in the GAISE recommendations.  That said, I guess my principal concern would be that students don't really get the conceptual roles of, say, variability and randomness enough.  My suggestion for how to teach this is unfortunately too time consuming to actually implement, but I'd ultimately like to incorporate some basic experimental design towards the beginning of the course to help drive this in.  I'm not suggesting partial factorial designs or anything; my thinking is closer to my end of experimental design project, wherein everyone had to design an experiment involving distances a catapult would launch various projectiles.  Again, a bit involved, but I feel like the experience of running a basic experiment again and again and getting different results really drives in the seeming randomness that we can't totally account for.  This would be particularly effective if done "in meatspace" (if you'll allow the phrase) so that students are actually running the basic repeated experiments themselves, but frankly that doesn't seem too available a pedagogical approach in the near future, so perhaps this is just pie in the sky anyways.

Correspondingly, it's increasingly hard for me to remember what a "traditional" intro statistics curriculum is.  The most regressive intro stat class I took was probably a psychology research analysis class that focused mostly on filling out ANOVA tables and working in SPSS.  That said, I'm not so opposed to understanding ANOVA tables, and while I wouldn't recommend SPSS in the slightest, clearly the focus on computational packages was nice.  As mentioned, Duke's intro stat class has all of the nice bells and whistles one might typically like to add (e.g. simulation-based inference, dplyr, ggplot2, self-designed projects on Kaggle datasets).  Most of my desired things to add are, frankly, just about teaching parts of a regression analysis class in an intro class.  I don't have a lot of further things to add onto this.  (I've often thought I may have more interesting ideas about 2nd statistics classes or, particularly, penultimate statistics classes than the popular 1st or capstone statistics classes, but that's a topic for another time).  

The biggest challenges to more computationally intensive intro stat classes are frankly just fear, or else making the topic more complicated than it should be.  You can learn for loops and if/else statements and intro coding playing with a graphing calculator in middle school -- I should know, that's how I learned.  However, frankly I wonder whether we should go back to computational basics more often.  Tidyverse is undoubtedly useful, and frankly I've learned a lot just from teaching basic tidyverse as a TA.  Even so, sometimes I get the sense we'd get farther with people's computational understandings if we worked in base R and subscripting more.  